# A comparative analysis of programming languages for blockchain development with focus on gas efficiency

## Cover page

TODO: in English or Ukrainian?

## Abstract

TODO:
Document size A pages, B illustrations, C references.

TODO: add keywords and sort alphabetically
WEB-3, BLOCKCHAIN, GAS OPTIMISATION, GAS EFFICIENCY, PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE, OPCODE, BYTECODE, COMPILATION, SMART CONTRACT, SOLIDITY

The process of developing smart contracts with different programming languages, further source code compilation into bytecode, and its on-chain execution is an object of research in this paper. The subject of the research is the comparison of different programming languages for smart contract development with focus on gas efficiency of the resulting bytecode.

The main goal is to compare different programming languages for blockchain development, highlighting the gas efficiency of the resulting bytecode, alongside with other language features.

The research is based on the analysis of the Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM), its code execution, programming languages for smart contract development, the features of corresponding compilers, and the gas efficiency of the resulting bytecode.

The results of this research paper describe features of different programming languages for blockchain development, their advantages and disadvantages, and a comparision of gas efficiency of the resulting bytecode.

The research findings can be used by developers to choose the most gas-efficient programming language for blockchain development both prior to the development or for optimisation purposes.

## Table of contents

- Introduction
- Chapter 1. Smart contract development
  - 1.1. Blockchain technology
  - 1.2. Smart contracts
  - 1.3. Ethereum Virtual Machine
  - 1.4. Gas
- Chapter 2. Compilation and bytecode
  - 2.1. Compilation process
  - 2.2. Resulting bytecode
- Chapter 3. Blockchain programming languages comparison
  - 3.1. List of programming languages for blockchain development
    - 3.1.1. Solidity
    - 3.1.2. Yul
    - 3.1.3. TODO: add more languages
  - 3.2. Criterias for comparison
  - 3.3. Gas comparison
    - 3.3.1. Defining the Smart Contract for comparison
    - 3.3.2. Developing the Smart Contract
    - 3.3.3. Compiling the Smart Contract
    - 3.3.4. Benchmarking the resulting bytecode
- Conclusion
- References

## Introduction

**Current state of the research topic.** The blockchain technology has gained significant popularity in recent years due to its decentralised nature, security, and transparency. One of the key components of blockchain technology is smart contracts, self-executing contracts with the terms of the agreement between buyer and seller being directly written into lines of code. Smart contracts are executed on the blockchain and can be used for various purposes, such as financial transactions, supply chain management, and digital identity verification.

Smart contracts are executed inside Ethereum Virtual Machine (EVM), a virtual machine that runs on every blockchain node when validating transactions. To prevent spam and unreasonably-heavy computational transactions, a concept of gas was introduced. Each operation in the EVM has a gas cost associated with it, which corresponds to the computational resources required to execute the operation. The gas cost is paid by the transaction sender in Ether, the native cryptocurrency of the Ethereum blockchain.

On the one hand, gas fees allow for a fair and efficient execution of smart contracts, preventing spam and denial-of-service attacks. On the other hand, gas fees can be a significant cost for both the smart contract developers and their users, especially when the contract contains complex and computationally-intensive logic. Consequently, it is crucial to optimise the gas efficiency of the smart contracts to reduce the gas fees and ease the burden of developing and using smart contracts.

**Relevance of the research**.
Each EVM operation is denoted by an opcode, which constitutes the bytecode of the smart contract. The bytecode is generated by compiling the source code of the smart contract written in a programming language supported by the EVM. The gas cost of the bytecode execution is the sum of the gas costs of the individual opcodes that are executed.

Alongside with the rise of the blockchain technology, different languages for smart contract development have emerged. However, if the same smart contract is developed in different languages, the resulting bytecode may have different gas costs due to the language features and compiler optimisations. Therefore, it is essential to compare different programming languages for blockchain development with focus on gas efficiency of the resulting bytecode.

**Purpose and objectives of the research**. The purpose of the research "A comparative analysis of programming languages for blockchain development with focus on gas efficiency" is to compare different programming languages for blockchain development, highlighting the gas efficiency of the resulting bytecode, alongside with other language features.

To achieve this goal, the following objectives were outlined:

1. Conduct a research on the blockchain technology
2. Describe how smart contracts and Ethereum Virtual Machine work
3. Define gas and its role in the EVM
4. Investigate the compilation process and resulting bytecode
5. Compile a list of programming languages for blockchain development
6. Define criterias for comparison of programming languages
7. Define and develop a smart contract for comparison
8. Compile and benchmark the resulting bytecode

**Object, methods and means of research**
An object of the research is the process of developing smart contracts with different programming languages, further source code compilation into bytecode, and its on-chain execution.

During the research, the most popular programming languages for blockchain development were analysed, and the criterias for comparison were defined. A smart contract was developed in different programming languages, compiled into bytecode, and benchmarked for gas consumption.
The result of the research is a comparison of the programming languages with focus on gas efficiency of the resulting bytecode.

Microsoft Visual Studio Code was used as an integrated development environment (IDE) for the development of the smart contract.

**Possible areas of application**
This paper describes the process of smart contract execution on the EVM-compatible blockchains, the concepts of gas, opcodes, bytecode, and the compilation process. The results of this research can be used by developers to better understand the relation between the bytecode and gas efficiency, and to choose the most gas-efficient programming language for blockchain development.
